# Masks of Nyarlathotep - Session 1


I got invited to join a campaign of *Masks of Nyarlathotep*, one of the most
well-known Call of Cthulhu campaigns.
I'll be keeping a campaign journal in this series of posts.

{{< admonition type=warning title="Warning!" open=true >}}
There will, of course, be spoilers for *Masks of Nyarlathotep* through all of
these posts.
{{< /admonition >}}

<!--more-->

## 1. The Campaign

I've never played Call of Cthulhu before but I've known tons of really dedicated
gamers over the years who have raved about it, so I've always wanted to try it.
According to [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masks_of_Nyarlathotep)
the campaign was originally published for Call of Cthulhu 2nd edition, but we
are playing the new version remade for CoC 7th Edition. We're playing using
Discord and Roll20, which I've had experience with and it's certainly good
enough to have plenty of fun with. We're going to try to play weekly with short
sessions so we should be able to keep the pacing fast and interest levels high.
The group is drawn from the Mutant Crawl Classics table I'm playing in (which I
guess I should write about at some point) so it's a cool change of pace.

## 2. The Investigators

In Call of Cthulhu the PC's are typically 'investigators' rather than
'adventurers' or heroes or what-have-you. Instead of being career soldiers or
knights or whatever you are much more likely to be a graduate student or a
reporter. This of course follows from Lovecraft's work[^lovecraft], in which
many of the main characters are academics or journalists who have stumbled upon
some evidence of the greater world we don't know about and have decided to
investigate.

[^lovecraft]: It bears pointing out that [Lovecraft was
  racist](https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/tv/story/2020-08-13/lovecraft-country-hbo-hp-lovecraft-racism-explained)
  and his outsized influence on modern horror literature is more than a little
  problematic.

This campaign comes with a number of pre-generated characters. Since this is the
first experience most of us have had with Call of Cthulhu we decided to just
pick from among them and get into it quickly.[^death] I have always wanted to
play the role of the curious professor in a cosmic horror story so I chose to
play Johan Braun. Here is the complete party:[^handouts]

[^death]: We have been assured that we'll be seeing new faces pretty soon. I
  guess that's good?

[^handouts]: This material is freely available from [Chaosium's itch.io
  page](https://chaosium.itch.io/masks-of-nyarlathotep-handouts-pack).

### The Doctor

{{< figure src="/images/masks/arthur_dibden.png" >}}

Arthur Dibden served in the British Royal Army for over twenty years. After the
war he took up traveling, and wound up in Colombia fighting the Spanish Flu.

### The Historian

{{< figure src="/images/masks/eleanor_butler.png" >}}

Eleanor Butler grew up on a farm in the Midwest before running away to New York
to study history. She signed on to the expedition to try and finally make her
mark in academia.

### The Dilettante

{{< figure src="/images/masks/jennifer_smallwood.png" >}}

Jennifer Smallwood inherited a small fortune along with her older sister when
her parents were lost at sea in the late 1800s. While her sister has stayed at
home, Jennifer has traveled around the world before becoming bored. She signed
on to the expedition in search of adventure.

### The Professor

{{< figure src="/images/masks/johan_braun.png" >}}

Johan Braun was the child of a librarian and a language teacher, and inherited
their love of books and learning. The Great War broke out while he was teaching
at the University of Wurzburg, and he was called to serve in the trenches on the
Western Front. When the war ended he left Europe behind in order to escape the
horror he had seen. He took a position at UC Berkeley, but was not able to fit
in with the American way of life. He hopes to find a way to put his expertise to
good use on the expedition.

### The Adventurer

{{< figure src="/images/masks/perry_astor.png" >}}

Perry Astor was raised on a Canadian ranch, and his love of the outdoors has
stayed with him throughout his life. At 17 he left home and began traveling
around the world in search of excitement. He's joined the expedition because he
thinks it's just the thing he's looking for.

## 3. Rendezvous in Lima

{{< figure src="/images/masks/clipping.png" >}}

Each of the investigators had independently learned of a rich American explorer
assembling an expedition to explore an ancient pyramid in southern Peru, and
(mostly for curiousity) we had each decided to sign on. We met Mr. Larkin at the
Bar Cardenas in Lima, Peru in the evening of March 18th, 1921 to discuss the
expedition and make plans for the journey.

{{< gallery class="content-gallery" >}}
{{< img src="/images/masks/augustus_larkin.png" >}}
{{< img src="/images/masks/luis_de_mendoza.png" >}}
{{< img src="/images/masks/jesse_hughes.png" >}}
{{< /gallery >}}

Wearing a fine linen suit and bearing an upbeat, confident manner, Larkin told
us a tall tale of an ancient pyramid structure in the Peruvian highlands to the
southeast. Accompanying Larkin were two other men who had signed on to the
journey. Luis de Mendoza was clearly Larkin's body man, and he seemed to be
angry about it. Scowling at anything and everything, he did not say a word
during the meeting. The other man was a Black American archaeologist who seemed
only too pleased to have this kind of opportunity.

Larkin told us of fabulous riches which could be recovered at this ruined
temple. According to him, he would have done it already if he had had a proper
team with him. He said it would take about a week all told to travel there,
first by truck to Puno, then by mule to the ruin itself. When asked some
questions about the site, Larkin showed the group two archaeological pieces
found previously at the site, both made from gold. The first was a sort of
pendant depicting a man-shaped figure holding two rods. The second, a golden
cup, had turqoise inlay in strange non-repeating shapes.

After satisfying our curiousity regarding his previous attempts Larkin and
Mendoza bade us good night with plans to prepare to leave for the journey in two
days time. Hughes and the rest of us stayed for another drink.

## 4. What's Really Going On?

No sooner had Larkin and de Mendoza left than Hughes told us that he wasn't an
archaeologist and his name wasn't Hughes, but that in fact he was an
investigative reporter named Jackson Elias.

{{< figure src="/images/masks/jackson_elias.png" >}}

Thinking back on it, several members of our group had actually read some Elias'
work, which was predominantly focused on investigating occult death cults. He
went on to tell us that he was investigating Larkin and his strange story
regarding the pyramid. He pointed out that the two items Larkin had produced
couldn't possibly be from the same site, as one (the cup) was Incan and from the
15th century, while the pendant was from around the 5th century.

Elias told us that he'd been looking into Larkin for a while at this point, and
that he'd found traces of a centuries-old death cult near Lake Titicaca (which
is quite near Puno and the site of the ruins). Apparently, on his previous
expedition Larkin had attempted to hire locals from Puno to venture into the
temple, however they refused because of stories of a local creature called a
*kharisiri*, which evidently is some kind of fat-sucking devil.

Discussing the ramifications of all this, we decided that we couldn't possibly
take Larkin at his word at this point. We decided that it would be best to
perform some of our own research by heading to the archaeological museum in the
morning. We made plans to meet Elias there and went to bed.

## 5. A Trip to the Museum {#museum}

{{< figure src="/images/masks/lima.png" >}}

Fortunately for us, just down the road a ways from our hotel was the Museo de
Arqueologia y Antropologia, so following breakfast we reconvened there at the
office of Prof. Sanchez, a friend and contact of Elias.

{{< figure src="/images/masks/prof_memesio_sanchez.png" >}}

Sanchez told us a curious story: evidently he had, upon reading the story of
Larkin's planned expedition, reached out to try and lend his expertise to the
project. Rather than hire on one of the leading experts (someone I would surely
like to have along, were I planning an archaeological excavation) Larkin had
rebuffed Sanchez's efforts regarding the pyramid. We spent some time discussing
the ruins and querying Sanchez about them, and he told us about recovering a
journal written by a conquistador which speaks of something very similar and may
reveal its location. Sanchez's assistant, Trinidad Rizo, had just went down to
the storeroom to locate the journal, but had been gone for some time, so Arthur
and I decided to go check on her.

Downstairs, we found the door to the storeroom ajar, and upon investigating we
discovered the emaciated body of a young woman, missing a palm-sized disk of
flesh from her abdomen. She had fallen in the storeroom and been covered by a
moderate amount of clutter, and in her fall had broken open a wooden crate
packed with straw. We couldn't help but notice (as we moved Rizo's body while
investigating) the large piece of worked gold inlaid with geometric patterns
that was poking out of the box, so naturally we collected it.

{{< figure src="/images/masks/worked_gold.png" >}}

Looking around, Arthur located a trail of bloody footprints and we followed them
out to the street, where suddenly we heard a loud bang and the screams of
passersby trying to get away from a vehicle which had suddenly caught fire.
Continuing onward we followed the trail out the back exit to the street, and
then around the building to the window from Sanchez's office where it ended.

Not knowing anywhere else to go, we went back inside to discuss events with our
companions. We showed them the 2ft rod of gold, and then began deciphering
Rizo's notebook.

{{< figure src="/images/masks/journal.png" >}}

The notebook told the harrowing tale of a conquistador named Gaspar de Figueroa,
who had come to Peru in the company of Pizarro and also joined by four others:
Hernando Ruiz, Diego Garrida, Luis de Mendoza, and Pedro de Velasco. Everyone in
the room sat up with a strange look when we read the third name - surely this
could not be the same man we had met the night before?

## 6. The Obligatory Trip to the Library

Not able to determine anything further at the museum but simultaneously feeling
that we did not know enough yet, we decided to go to the local library to see
what we could turn up. While I searched in vain for a text about the history of
the local area, the others in the group found a document tying Figueroa to a
Padre de los Gusanos, and Sanchez managed to piece together the location to the
pyramid, south of Puno.

We decided as a group to prepare as rapidly as we could and depart Lima ahead of
Larkin. If we could get to the ruins ahead of him, we could perhaps head off
whatever strange plot he had concocted. That settled, we divided up tasks and
set about gathering supplies for the journey.

## 7. Turns out he talks after all

Towards the end of the day we met up once again for dinner. On the way back to
the hotel, I noticed that we were being followed in the street. Perry, who seemed
all too accustomed to this sort of thing, organized us so that we quickly moved
out of sight and were able to observe de Mendoza as he followed in our path.
Confronting him, he made vaguely threatening statements to us, in particular
saying that he "always looks in on anyone working with the master", whatever
that means.

Unnerved but undeterred, we returned to the hotel and each went retired to our
rooms. If things went according to plan we would be well on our way to Puno this
time tomorrow.

{{< figure src="/images/masks/peru.png" >}}

## 8. Final Thoughts

This session comprised roughly half of the prologue chapter of the campaign. We
spent most of it getting to know each other, figuring out our character sheets
and the inevitable technical problems with Discord, and working to establish the
familiar rhythm you get into when you have been playing with the same group for
long enough. While we haven't really done much yet I can say with some certainty
that this is a very cool game, and I'm really excited to have a chance to play
Masks.

